Patient preference with regard to negative pressure wound therapy and participation in wound care: a qualitative study
Alexandra HJ Janssen, PhD1*& Johannes A Wegdam, MD1, Alita Jaspa, MSc2
Tammo S de Vries Reilingh, PhD1, Hester Vermeulen, PhD,3,4,Anne M Eskes, PhD5,6

1Department of Surgery, Elkerliek Hospital, Helmond, the Netherlands
2Meander Group, Home Care, Nursing Homes and Residential Care, Landgraaf, the Netherlands
3Scientific Institute for Quality of Healthcare Radboud University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
4HAN University of Applied Science, Faculty of Health and Social Studies, Institute of Nursing, Nijmegen, the Netherlands
5Department of Surgery, Amsterdam Gastroenterology Endocrinology Metabolism and Amsterdam Public Health, Amsterdam UMC, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, the Netherlands
6Menzies Health Institute Queensland and School of Nursing and Midwifery, Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia

Objective: To explore the experiences and preferences of patients with wounds treated with negative pressure wound therapy (NPWT) regarding shared decision-making and patient participation.
Method: Semi-structured interviews were conducted with adult patients treated with NPWT. Interview topics included shared decision-making and patients' active participation in wound treatment. Thematic analysis was applied to identify themes.
Results: The interview cohort comprised ten patients. Four themes emerged: (1) Having a wound makes patients uncertain and thus influences their quality of life; (2) NPWT influences patients' daily lives; (3) Patients consider professional treatment decisions most important in the decision-making processes; (4) Self-management of wounds is accepted by patients only for low-complexity and well-healing wounds under supervision. Participants emphasised their worries about the future and the impact of the wound/treatment on their families. After being thoroughly informed, participants preferred that health professionals decide on the treatment choice. In addition, participants and/or their relatives did not want to actively participate in complex wound care. As well as expressing a need for qualified wound care professionals, participants reported that they did not want to be or feel responsible for the wound treatment.
Conclusion: Shared decision-making and active patient participation are underused and underexposed topics in wound care. Patients' recognition of the importance of their personal preferences can facilitate shared decision-making.

