Nursing home management and clinical learning environments: A qualitative study
Bjorg Aglen,1* Vera Louise Sørø,1 Arne Orvik,2 Sylvia Söderström,3 and Gørill Haugan4

1Department of Public Health and Nursing, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Postbox 8905, 7491 Trondheim, Norway.
2Department of Health Sciences, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Postbox 1517, 6025 Ålesund, Norway.
3Department of Neuromedicine and Movement Science, Norwegian University of Science and Technology, 7491 Trondheim, Norway.
4Faculty of Nursing and Health Sciences, Nord University, Postbox 93, 7601 Levanger, Norway.


Abstract:

For their health and well-being, nursing home residents increasingly depend on appropriate basic nursing care that requires certain clinical skills. In our study, we examined how the managers of nursing homes facilitate appropriate clinical learning environments to promote basic nursing skills. Following a qualitative design and with reference to complexity theory, we probed multiple sources of data in a reflexive thematic analysis. The results revealed the NH managers adopted a holistic approach balancing a complexity of interests: maintaining effective oversight, supporting staff in delivering high-quality care, and providing learners with valuable learning experiences and guidance. They recognised that integrating these complex interests was best achieved by empowering the caring staff and supporting them in doing so. Clinical learning environments have inherent self-organizing capacities, where staff can autonomously manage their tasks and collaborate effectively. This self-organization is a powerful aspect that complements the managerial authority. Facilitating learners' insight into the power of the caring staff's self-organizing capacities is important for basic nursing competencies The managers' understanding of how the caring staff naturally organise their work represents a resource for both maintaining and enhancing the quality of both care and clinical learning. Thus, their contribution and involvement are vital for the success of any initiative aimed at enhancing the clinical learning environment.

Biography:
Bjørg Aglen – Associate Professor at the Department of Public Health and Nursing, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, NTNU. Aglen is a registered nurse and a public health nurse. She

is currently the program coordinator for the Master in Public Health Nursing at NTNU. Her fields of interest in teaching and research include health promotion and prevention, public health work, learning in clinical placements within professional education, organization, leadership, and service improvement. She has formal leadership education and management experience from the municipal health and care services in general, and nursing home management in particular. She has also served as a clinical lecturer/supervisor for students during their clinical placements in general, including nursing homes. She is experienced in qualitative methods and served as on of two the project leaders for the project reported on in this presentation.









