
Results from prospective, monocentric, observational randomized controlled pilot study of two all-in-one multicomponent compression systems in healthy volunteers

Christine Böhm  Lohmann & Rauscher GmbH & Co. KG, Neuwied, Germany 

Background:
Efficient compression therapy considers the applied compression pressure (P), the overlapping layers (La), the components and construction of the compression devices (C) and their elasticity (E) (P-La-C-E) concept. For the treatment of venous leg ulcers (VLUs) with compression therapy, for example, two-layer bandage systems, four-layer systems, and multicomponent systems including elastic and inelastic bandages are available. A clear advantage of one system over the others has not yet been demonstrated. An alternative to using multiple single components with different characteristics could be the use of a bandage that combines several properties.

Method: 
Two commercially available all-in-one multicomponent compression systems have been tested for the sub-bandage resting and working pressures during continuous wearing for a period of one week in an observational randomized controlled pilot study in a cohort of healthy volunteers. A literature search was conducted for comparison with established multi-layer systems. The participants were asked for the feedback on the wearing comfort of the bandages and how well they tolerated the bandages. 

Results: 
A total of 22 healthy volunteers took part in the study. A mean resting and working pressure within the relevant therapeutic range of 20–40mmHg was achieved with both bandage systems. At application, the mean pressures were 46mmHg with both bandages and dropped to within the therapeutic range by the next day. The mean bandage slippage with both bandages was <5cm on the third day.

Conclusion: 
Both bandages achieved therapeutic working pressures and tolerable resting pressures and values comparable to established multi-layer systems. Both products were well tolerated.  Confirmation in a larger cohort of patients with e.g. venous leg ulcers in a real-world setting reflecting clinical routine is recommended.

* Dini V, Vietina A, Michelucci A, Rizzello F, Romanelli M, Mosti G, Namislo A, Böhm C, Abel M.  J Wound Care 2026, 35(1):26-34. https://doi.org/10.12968/jowc.2025.0456





Biography
Chemist and physician with extensive experience in clinical research in various clinical areas like cardiology, oncology, radiology and tissue regeneration, working in industry. Strong focus on developing medical devices and to propose solutions for unmet medical needs. Employed at Lohmann & Rauscher since 2023.
