The prebiotic and anti-inflammatory effects of oat beta-glucan – mechanisms of action in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)

Łukasz Kopiasz1*, Katarzyna Dziendzikowska1, Joanna Harasym2,3, Joanna Gromadzka-Ostrowska1
1 Department of Dietetics, Institute of Human Nutrition Sciences, Warsaw University of Life Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
2 Department of Biotechnology and Food Analysis, Wroclaw University of Economics and Business, Wroclaw, Poland
3 Adaptive Food Systems Accelerator-Science Centre, Wroclaw University of Economics and Business, Wroclaw, Poland

Oat beta-glucan (OBG) is a linear, water-soluble polysaccharide with numerous health-promoting properties, such as hypoglycemic, hypolipidemic, prebiotic, as well as immunomodulatory, anti-inflammatory, and anticancer effects. In vitro and in vivo studies detail the mechanisms of prebiotic action, including modulation of gut microbiota composition and stimulation of short-chain fatty acids production. The immunomodulatory and related anti-inflammatory effects of OBG have been well studied in rodent models, including by our team, but there is a lack of detailed preclinical and clinical studies. This presentation aims to detail the mechanisms of action of OBG in IBD through its prebiotic and anti-inflammatory effects. This presentation is based on studies in the scientific literature, including our team's results, as well as the preliminary results of our preclinical study in domestic pigs and human trials. Our previous studies in a rat model of Crohn's disease demonstrated the strong anti-inflammatory effect of a highly purified OBG isolate, which significantly reduced the expression of multiple pro-inflammatory cytokines in the inflamed colon. These studies also demonstrated the immunomodulatory effect of OBG by influencing the lymphocyte profile in the lamina propria of the colonic mucosa and reducing the expression of many chemokines and their receptors. In addition, OBG supplementation showed a protective effect against damaged intestinal barrier by inhibiting excessive apoptosis. The effect of OBG on reducing the expression of proinflammatory cytokines was also demonstrated by our study in a rat model of LPS-induced enteritis, as well as by other authors in a mouse model of DSS-induced colitis. These results are complemented by a current porcine preclinical study in which local mild to moderate colonic inflammation was induced. In this study, OBG administration led to a significant decrease fecal calprotectin concentration and modulation of myeloid and lymphoid cell profiles in colon. These changes caused by OBG supply demonstrate the anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory effect of this polysaccharide, particularly by prebiotic properties.

Acknowledgments: The authors acknowledge the financial support of the National Science Centre (NCN), Poland (grant no. 2022/47/B/NZ9/03123).

BIOGRAPHY:   Dr. Łukasz Kopiasz is an Assistant Professor at the Warsaw University of Life Sciences (SGGW), Poland, with over seven years of experience in molecular biology, particularly in immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis. He received his PhD in 2024 for research investigating the mechanisms of action of oat beta-glucan in Crohn’s disease and in the early stages of colon carcinogenesis, using rat models. His research interests focus on the therapeutic potential of bioactive food components in the treatment and alleviation of chronic diseases, the anti-inflammatory and anticancer effects of beta-glucans, and dietary therapy in chronic conditions.
