 
Between sustainability ambitions and market constraints: stabilizing regional food supply under 
competing institutional logics 
 
Eric Kamgang 
Laval university, Quebec, Canada 
Abstract 
Regional food supply is increasingly mobilized as a lever for the transition toward more sustainable food 
systems, particularly in relation to climate issues, territorial resilience, and the support of local 
economies. Despite growing interest and public support, many initiatives struggle to stabilize over time 
as a mode of supplying professional markets, which are structured by dominant economic, regulatory, 
and professional requirements.  This study examines the conditions under which these initiatives can  
stabilize within this context. Drawing on the institutional logics perspective, it analyzes the articulation 
of heterogeneous principles such as economic efficiency, standardization, regulatory compliance, 
territorial anchoring, and environmental sustainability. The analysis is based on 36 interviews conducted 
with actors from the food system in Québec (Canada). The findings highlight the coexistence of multiple 
logics and the presence of structuring tensions, particularly related to price, volumes, logist ics, and 
standardization. These tensions constrain the integration of sustainability objectives, including those 
related to reducing environmental impacts.  The study identifies key organizational mechanisms  
(intermediation, logistics coordination, and resource mutualization ) that support critical functions such 
as supply aggregation, order management, delivery planning, and commercial interfacing. The degree of 
integration of these functions conditions both the stabilization of initiatives and their ability  to meet the 
requirements of professional markets.  These results show that the contribution of regional food supply 
to sustainability and climate-related challenges relies on the ability to develop integrated and coordinated 
organizational arrangements over time. 
 
Biography 
Eric Kamgang is a PhD candidate at Université Laval (Québec, Canada) and a member of the Canada 
Research Chair on the Internalization of Sustainable Development and Organizational Accountability. 
His research focuses on responsible sourcing in the agri -food sector, with a particular interest in the 
governance of food systems. He primarily uses qualitative approaches to analyze organizational and 
institutional dynamics. He also contributes to teaching activities and the dissemination of knowledge in 
the field of sustainable development. 
 
Presenting author details  
Full name: Samuel Eric Kamgang 
Contact number: + 1 418 473 5521 
Linked In account: https://www.linkedin.com/in/samuel-kamgang-22792873/  
Session name/ number: Sustainability and Climate Change 
Category: Oral presentation 

